Ontario Rental
Housing Tribunal

Tribunal du logement
de l’Ontario

777 Bay Street, 12th Floor
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2E5
Tel: (416) 585-7295
Fax: (416) 585-6363

777, rue Bay, 12e étage
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2E5
Tél: (416) 585-7295
Télécopieur: (416) 585-6363

TO THE HONOURABLE TONY CLEMENT,
MINISTER OF MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS AND HOUSING

MINISTER:
I have the honour to submit for your approval the Ontario Rental Housing
Tribunal’s Annual Report for the 1998/99 fiscal year.

Respectfully submitted,

Chisanga Puta-Chekwe
Chair
Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal

Ontario Rental
Housing Tribunal

Tribunal du logement
de l’Ontario

777 Bay Street, 12th Floor
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2E5
Tel: (416) 585-7295
Fax: (416) 585-6363

777, rue Bay, 12e étage
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2E5
Tél: (416) 585-7295
Télécopieur: (416) 585-6363

Chair’s Message
The Tenant Protection Act was proclaimed into law on June 17, 1998 and ushered
in a number of changes in the statutory rights and obligations of residential
landlords and tenants. It also created a new administrative Tribunal to adjudicate
and mediate landlord and tenant disputes over these rights and obligations.
Thanks to a large number of dedicated public servants, primarily in the ministries
of Municipal Affairs and Housing and the Attorney General, the Tribunal was able
to open its doors and immediately provide service to the public on June 17,
performing duties and functions which, until the day before, had been performed
by different parts of different ministries.
The establishment of the Tribunal was a daunting, yet invigorating challenge. A
major goal of the Government was to speed up and simplify the process of
resolving landlord and tenant disputes. This was accomplished through changes
in legislation and also by a major re-engineering of administrative procedures and
practices.
Effective management of the Tribunal’s anticipated application workload is a key
element toward meeting this goal. The Tribunal customized a software system
and installed it in its eight District Offices and 12 Client Service Offices across the
province. During the next year, the Tribunal will be improving this system and
offering a service to allow clients to file applications using the internet and have
access to the information on their cases through interactive voice recognition
software.
A review of the Tribunal’s operations has been completed and offers us a number
of innovative ways in which we can continue to streamline our workload while
providing our client base with the best possible customer service.
...2

-2We have enjoyed our first year of operation and believe that the coming years will
allow us to become even better equipped to provide excellent service to the people
of Ontario.

Sincerely,

Chisanga Puta-Chekwe, Chair
Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal

THE TENANT PROTECTION ACT
On June 17, 1998, The Tenant Protection Act, commonly known as the TPA, was
proclaimed.
The TPA brought together six pieces of legislation that formerly governed the
relationship between landlords and tenants, plus the Ontario Building Code and
the Planning Act. The result is a comprehensive package that balances the rights
of tenants and landlords.

The four primary objectives of the TPA are:
±

To simplify the relationship between landlords and tenants

±

To balance the needs of landlords and tenants

±

To create an efficient process that deals with disputes quickly

±

To create a cost-efficient process

Under the previous legislation, disputes between landlords and tenants were
settled through the provincial court system. The formality of the court system and
the associated high costs, as well as the length of time it took to resolve some
disputes offered exciting challenges to the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal.

As well, the previous legislation had a separate system, Rent Control Programs,
that oversaw the regulation of rent increases and provided information resources
for tenants and landlords. The need to provide a one-window service to tenants
and landlords was clear. As a result, the Tenant Protection Act consolidates the
two systems and created an independent, quasi-judicial agency - the Ontario
Rental Housing Tribunal.

THE ROLE OF THE ONTARIO RENTAL HOUSING TRIBUNAL
The role of the Tribunal is to:
±

Resolve tenant and landlord disputes through either mediation or
adjudication

±

Regulate rent increases in rental accommodations

±

Provide landlords and tenants with information about their rights and
obligations

Landlords and tenants now have a forum that focuses solely on residential rental
accommodation issues and a process that is faster and more efficient for resolving
their issues.

The Adjudication Process
The Tribunal was designed to create a more informal environment. Under the
adjudication process:
±

Disputes are heard in public buildings instead of courtrooms

±

Tenants may choose to represent themselves and may consult an on-site
Legal Aid representative

±

The more conciliatory approach of mediation is encouraged before the
hearing process begins or during the hearing if the adjudicator feels that the
matter may be resolved easily

The Tribunal’s adjudicators are highly qualified professionals who have both the
experience and the knowledge to deal quickly and fairly with the issues.
Adjudicators are appointed to the Tribunal after undergoing a rigorous and
competitive interview process.

Page 1

Locations
The Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal has eight District Offices located across the
province. The District Offices are the main processing offices of the Tribunal and
where many of the Tribunal’s hearings are held. The Tribunal holds hearings in
the area that is most convenient to the landlords and tenants who reside in the
residential complex that is part of the application.

The District Offices are located in the following areas:
÷

London

÷

Hamilton

÷

Toronto South (56 Wellesley Avenue)

÷

Toronto North (North York)

÷

Toronto East (Scarborough)

÷

Ottawa

÷

Sudbury

The Client Service Offices are offices where applications can be filed, Customer
Service Representatives are available to answer questions and where hearings
are held when convenient to both parties.

The Client Service Offices are located in the following areas:
÷

Windsor

÷

Etobicoke

÷

Thunder Bay

÷

North Bay

÷

Kingston

÷

St. Catharines

÷

Timmins

÷

Peterborough

÷

Durham/Whitby

÷

Barrie

÷

Owen Sound

÷

Kitchener

There are also 31 Data Filing Centres across the province where landlords or
tenants can file their applications and pick up information about the Tribunal. In

Page 2

total, the Tribunal has a network of offices that essentially covers each of the
county seats in the province.

Call Centre
The Tribunal has implemented a call centre for handling customer inquiries. This
is a toll-free number (1-888-332-3234) which operates 24 hours a day, seven days
a week. A customer service operator is available during normal business hours,
but an extensive telephone script answers our most frequently asked questions
about the Tenant Protection Act.

During our first year of operation, the Tribunal responded to 847,149 telephone
calls, approximately 3,200 each day. After hours and on weekends, a toll-free
number is also available for faxing time sensitive documents and for ordering any
of our 30 public education brochures. Our brochures are available in English and
French. Selected brochures on the most important topics are available in seven
other languages; Tamil, Portuguese, Spanish, Punjabi, Italian, Chinese and Polish.

The Tribunal has its own website (orht.gov.on.ca) and responds to between 40
and 50 E-mail inquiries a week. All forms are available on the internet as well as
through each District and Client Service Office.

Page 3

STAFF OF THE TRIBUNAL
The Tribunal employs 282 staff and members. The three main categories include
adjudicators, mediators and customer service representatives.
÷

The members of the Tribunal are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in
Council. An adjudicator reviews landlord and tenant disputes and rules on
the basis of the evidence provided by the parties and in accordance with the
Tenant Protection Act.

÷

Mediators use both their knowledge of rent regulation and negotiation skills
to assist landlords and tenants in resolving their applications and their
concerns before the hearing. Mediation is offered under the Tribunal’s
legislation and is often used to clarify issues and settle disputes so that the
hearing may proceed more expeditiously. Mediated settlements are more
flexible in content than Tribunal orders. This often aids parties in reaching a
satisfactory conclusion to their difficulties.

÷

Customer Service Representatives are the Tribunal’s front-line contact for
drop-in customers and for telephone inquiries. Customer Service
Representatives assist both tenants and landlords with completion of their
applications and provide information on their rights and responsibilities.

Page 4

Statistical Information for the First Year of Operations
The Tribunal’s first year of operations has been a productive one. Based on
previous receipt trends from the Courts, the Tribunal anticipated approximately
65,000 applications during its first year of operation. In fact, the Tribunal received
59,894 applications, or 93% of the forecast.

Total receipts for the first year of operation under the TPA had the following
profiles.

(CE refers to Central; EA to Eastern; No to Northern; SO to Southern; SW to
Southwestern; TE to Toronto East; TN to Toronto North and TS to Toronto South;)

TS
19.7%

CE
12.0%

EA
13.2%

NO
2.9%

TN
14.8%

SO
11.6%

11.3%
TE

14.4%
SW

LAN D LOR D vs TEN AN T R EC EIPTS
Tenants
8%

Landlords
92%

Page 5

76% of the applications received by the Tribunal were for termination of tenancies
because of arrears of rent. This translates into 83% of the landlord applications.
Tenant applications for rent rebates, rent reductions and violations of tenants’
rights accounted for 5.8% of the applications filed during the Tribunal’s first year of
operation.

Above Guideline Increase Applications
An average of 251 applications for Above Guideline Increases was received each
year under the Rent Control Act. During the first year of Tribunal operations, 887
applications for Above Guideline Increases were filed. This increase was due to
the provision in the Act for transitional capital expenditures and is not expected to
continue. In the future, receipts of these Above Guideline Increase applications
should fall to approximately 300 filings annually.

Harassment Applications
Tenants can make application to the Tribunal at no charge if they believe that their
landlord has been harassing them and they wish to obtain relief. The Tribunal
received 1,789 applications involving harassment in its first year of operation.
Harassment application receipts were received by the districts proportionally to
their total application workload. Of the 1,789 applications received, 320 remained
outstanding at the end of the first year of operations.

Page 6

Mediation
Our mediation efforts provide an alternative way of resolving disputes for clients
and fosters communication between parties. Where mediation takes place
beforehand, clients often resolve issues during the mediation which can actually
reduce the length of the hearing and benefit both the client and our members.

Mediation was attempted in 17,900 cases. Mediators facilitated 14, 313
settlements or approximately 17% of the total resolutions during the year. As well,
mediation efforts contributed to the withdrawal of almost 500 applications or
motions.

During the next year of the Tribunal’s operations, we will focus on improving these
statistics by concentrating the mediators’ efforts on more difficult and time
consuming applications such as rent reduction, harassment and serious
impairment of the safety of the other residents in a complex

Reviews of Orders
The Tribunal received approximately 1,850 requests for review in its first year.
These requests were related to 1,755 cases for a review rate of 3.6% of original
orders. The Southwestern District has the lowest request for review rate at 2.5%,
while the Central District Office has the highest at about 4.7%.

Page 7

APPLICATION RESOLUTION
The Tribunal has been quite successful in resolving applications and not creating a
backlog during our first year of operations. We have aimed for resolving one
month’s workload each month so that the outstanding balance is never greater
than one month’s receipts.

The chart below will indicate how receipts and resolutions have remained fairly
constant during the year.

ORHT DISTRICT ACTIVITY
June 17, 1998 - Augus t 31, 1999

18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

15396
14350

R eceipts
R es olutions

9282
8393

10490
9551

9289
8537

2314
889

EA

11352
10617
8732
8120

2098

939
216

CE

11547
10665

O/S

NO

752

882

SO

SW

612

TE

735

TN

1046

TS

CE refers to Central; EA to Eastern; No to Northern; SO to Southern; SW to
Southwestern; TE to Toronto East; TN to Toronto North and TS to Toronto South.)

Telephone Inquiries

The Tribunal’s provincial inquiry telephone system received a total of 847,149
telephone calls from clients during the first year of operation. This translated into a
monthly average of 70,596. 774,857 calls (91.5%) were received during business
hours. Monday continues to be the busiest day of the week and volumes gradually
decline each day as the week progresses.

Page 8

ORDER SUMMARIES
Below we have summarized some typical orders issued by the Tribunal during the
first year of operations.

Page 9

Tenant Application

CET- 00339

Section 34

The tenants applied for an order to determine that the landlord failed to meet their
maintenance obligations. The Member concluded that the tenants were without
sufficient heat during the winter months, were without water for several days and
the rental unit was infested with rats. The order granted the tenants an abatement
in rent in the amount of $1,650.00 plus the costs of the application. If the landlord
failed to pay the full amount by the specified date, simple interest would be
calculated on the outstanding balance.

Landlord and Tenant Application (Joined)

CEL- 04696

Sections 34 & 69

CET- 00464

The landlord filed an application to terminate for non-payment of rent. The tenant
applied for an order to determine that the landlord had failed to meet its
maintenance obligations. The applications were joined.

The tenants did not pay their rent for a two month period from April 1, 1999 to May
31, 1999. The tenants presented undisputed photographic evidence of severe
deterioration of both the wooden frame and the paint on the wooden frame of the
front door and the entire garage door. The Member concluded that the landlord
had not maintained the unit in accordance with reasonable standards and
therefore refused to terminate the tenancy. The Member granted the tenants a
rent abatement of $1,320.00 less the arrears of rent for 2 months ($1314,08). The
landlord was directed to carry out repairs by a specific date, failing which, the
tenant was authorized to arrange for the maintenance work and to recover the cost
by deducting the amount from July’s rent.

Page 10

Landlord Application

TNL- 06256

Section 69

The landlord filed an application to terminate because the tenant failed to pay the
rent that they owed. The tenant did not file a dispute and therefore a standard
default order was issued. The default order terminated the tenancy and awarded
arrears of rent and compensation in the amount of $1979.39, per diem
compensation in the amount of $57.15 per day and the cost of filing the application
in the amount of $60.00. The tenant was ordered to pay all rent owing by April 19,
1999 in order to void the order. If the tenant did not pay the full amount owing by
April 19, they would start to owe interest on the balance outstanding.

Landlord Application

EAL- 03552

Section 138

The landlord filed an application to increase the rent by more than the guideline
due to 8 capital expenditure items.

During the hearing, the tenants argued that they had received insufficient notice of
the hearing. At this time, the tenants did not request an adjournment or an
extension of time to make submissions after the hearing . The Member concluded
that there was no “substantial” prejudice to the tenants as a result of receiving
short notice of the hearing. The tenants also made submissions about
maintenance concerns in their individual units and common areas. The Member
did not consider these submissions, as the Tenant Protection Act does not include
this issue as a relevant factor for a Section 138 application.

The Member found each item claimed by the landlord qualified as a capital
expenditure, each item was completed in the appropriate time period, and none of
the items were demonstrated to be unreasonable. Two receipts were not allowed
as they did not relate to the buildings being considered in this application. The
allowances for each of the capital expenditure items was apportioned equally to all
Page 11

units in the complex. The order determined that the landlord had justified an
increase above the guideline in the amount of 8%. Therefore, 4% was passed
through in the initial year, and the remaining 4% was to be carried forward to the
following year.

Landlord Application

TSL- 01301-SA-RV

SPPA

The landlord originally filed an application to terminate for non-payment of rent.
The tenant did not file a dispute and a default order was issued. The tenant filed
an application to set-aside the order which was denied. The landlord’s agent
asked for costs to be awarded in the amount of $450.00 which was denied.

The landlord requested a review of the set-aside order with respect to costs. The
landlord argued that the Tribunal erred in failing to consider established case law
on the assessment of costs, in failing to conclude that the Costs Interpretation
Guideline interferes with the “unfettered” discretion of a Member, by failing to
declare the Costs Interpretation Guideline invalid, and by failing to apply the proper
principles in assessing costs.

In the reasons, the Member says that the decision to award costs was
discretionary. The Member concluded that the Costs Interpretation Guideline did
not predetermine the Member’s decision towards costs. It merely assists the
Member in making a determination. The Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to
declare a Guideline invalid. Since many of the parties appearing before the
Tribunal have limited means, the power to award costs should not be used in a
way that would discourage parties from exercising their statutory rights. The
request for review was denied.

Page 12

Landlord Application

EAL- 02329

Section 69

The landlord filed an application to terminate as the tenant had been persistently
late in paying the rent. The landlord presented evidence that there had been six
occasions over a five year period on which the landlord had to serve Notices of
Termination to obtain payment of rent. In their dispute, the tenant claimed relief
from eviction due to maintenance issues.

In their reasons, the Member stated that to determine whether payments are
persistently late, the number of occasions involved and the length of time over
which the events took place must be considered. As well, the Member stated that
it is relevant to consider if circumstances are such that the rent would continue to
be late.

In the reasons, the Member listed three factors which resulted in the finding that
the tenant was persistently late in paying the rent:
±

The tenant withheld their rent for 4 out of 5 months from the period of April
1998 to Aug 1998.

±

On 5 out of the 6 occasions when the landlord served notice of termination,
the landlord was compelled to follow legal process to completion in order to
obtain payment. The tenant deliberately withheld payment until the last
moment when he had to either pay or be evicted.

±

The tenant had deliberately and repeatedly withheld rent in order to protest
lack of maintenance.

Relief from eviction was denied on the grounds that it would be unfair to the
landlord not to terminate and the tenants complaints did not constitute a serious
breach of the landlord’s responsibilities as contemplated in clause 84(2)a of the
Act. The tenancy was terminated.

Page 13

Landlord Application

TEL- 01352

Section 69

The landlord filed an application to terminate because the tenant had committed
an illegal act. The landlord and tenant entered into a tenancy agreement before
the proclamation of the Tenant Protection Act. The rent agreed to was an illegal
rent. The landlord argued that by entering into a tenancy agreement for an illegal
rent, the tenant had committed an illegal act and this was a ground for eviction.

In the reasons, the Member states that where an illegal act falls into an
“innocuous” category, the Tribunal Member might find the act to be illegal but
refuse the termination pursuant to section 84 of the Act on the ground that the
“illegal act” did not have potential to affect the character of the premises or to
disturb the reasonable enjoyment of the premises by the landlord or other tenants.
However, the Member did not choose to invoke section 84 because to do so would
be to imply that there was some merit to the landlords application. The Member
dismissed the application because the illegal act was committed by the landlord
not the tenant.

Tenant Application

TST- 00344

Section 144

The tenant filed an application for a rent rebate since the landlord had failed to pay
interest on the last month’s rent deposit. A deposit of $750 was collected May 1,
1997, and was applied to the rent for September 1998. Therefore, 6% interest
was owing to the tenant for the period from May 1, 1997 to August 31, 1998.

The order determined that the landlord had failed to pay the 6% interest required
by the TPA. The landlord asked that the interest be offset because of claims made
by the landlord. The Member concluded that there was no authority under Section
144 to off-set the interest. The landlord was ordered to pay $60 in interest plus the
cost of the application, since the landlord’s failure to pay the interest caused the
tenant to file the application.
Page 14

Tenant Application

NOT- 00151

Section 7(2)

The tenant filed an application to determine whether the Act applies. The tenant
leased property from the landlord with 30 year lease. The terms of the lease
permitted the tenant to erect a cottage. The lease provided that the premises must
only be used for recreational purposes on a seasonal basis. The tenant’s principal
residence was located elsewhere.

The tenant argued that since the rent on the property was raised when the Rent
Control Act was in force, the provisions of the Rent Control Act should govern the
Tribunal’s decision. The tenant submitted that, since there was a 30 year lease
and the property was occupied year round, the property should not be considered
“seasonal or temporary”.

The Member noted Section 223(2) of the Tenant Protection Act provides that the
Rent Control Act will continue in force only for the purpose of disposing of certain
types of applications which were filed under it. Since the tenant filed the
application after proclamation of the Tenant Protection Act, the Member concluded
that the Tenant Protection Act was the statute that should govern the proceedings.

The Member stated that the use of the words “temporary or seasonal” in Clause
3(a) of the Tenant Protection Act are meant to “capture situations where the
property is not used on a permanent basis as a principal residence”. The order
concludes that, since the tenant has a principal address elsewhere, the rental unit
is a cottage occupied for a seasonal period and is therefore exempt form the
Tenant Protection Act.

Tenant Application

SWT- 00326

Section 35

The tenants filed an application for an order to determine whether the landlord had
withheld the reasonable supply of water. The tenants submitted that they had
Page 15

lived in a country home, since 1995. On October 15, 1998, the well went dry. The
tenants attempted to correct the problem themselves by paying for 3,000 gallons
of water to be dumped in the well. However, the well went dry again within 2
hours. When they notified the landlord, his first response was to tell them to move.
The landlord looked into several options for temporary solutions, however, none of
these options was feasible. The tenants were left with no water for close to two
months.

The Member ordered the landlord to drill a new well by a specified date. The
Member also ordered the landlord to pay the Tribunal a fine of $1,000.00 for the
landlord’s lack of action and concern towards the tenants. The tenants were
granted an abatement of rent in the amount of $875.00. Simple interest would be
calculated on the outstanding balance if the landlord did not pay the total monies
owed, as directed.

Tenant Application

EAT- 00035

Section 35

The tenant filed for an order to determine whether the landlord had substantially
interfered with her reasonable enjoyment of the rental unit. The tenant began to
write letters to her landlord complaining about excessive noise in the apartment
above, in March of 1990. During this time, three different tenants had lived in the
unit above.

The tenant who lived in the above unit appeared at the hearing. The tenant
testified that she led a quiet life. Aware of the complaints of the tenant below, she
avoided creating excessive noise and had successfully taken steps to correct the
noise created by the use of her washing machine. The Member found the
testimony of the witness credible and reasonable.

The applicant presented evidence that she suffered from a medical condition
exacerbated by stress and lack of sleep. However, the Member was unable to
Page 16

conclude that the landlord was responsible for this stress. The landlord had
repeatedly sent letters to the various tenants in the above unit. An order was
issued dismissing the application. On the balance of probabilities, the Member
was unable to find that the landlord had substantially interfered with the
reasonable enjoyment of the rental unit by the tenant.

BIOGRAPHIES OF ADJUDICATORS
On the following pages, we have given you short biographies of each of the
adjudicators who resolve disputes for the Tribunal.

Page 17

CHAIR
Chisanga Puta-Chekwe

Chisanga Puta-Chekwe attended Sir William Borlase School in Marlow,
Buckinghamshire, before studying law at the University of Birmingham in England.
A Rhodes scholar, he received graduate degrees in law from the University of
London, and in philosophy, politics and economics from the University of Oxford.

Mr. Puta-Chekwe was a partner in the firm, Lloyd Jones and Collins in Zambia
from 1980 to 1986, and litigated a number of human rights cases, some of which
became landmark decisions.

From 1986 until 1989, he was vice-president of Meridien International Bank in
London, England. He then worked as an international development consultant,
mostly with the Canadian International Development Agency in Ottawa from 1989
until 1994.

In 1994, he served as adjudication officer and United Nations observer support
officer monitoring the South African election, and in 1996 served as election
supervisor in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

He spent six years with the Ontario Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, serving
as a part-time board member from 1991 until 1994, and as Chair of the Board from
1994 until 1997.
He served as Executive Director of Oxfam Canada between 1997 and 1998.
Mr. Puta-Chekwe is a Solicitor of the Supreme Court (England and Wales), and an
Advocate of the High Court for Zambia.

Page 18

DAVID BRAUND
David Braund is a graduate of the University of Western Ontario (BA. 1971 and
LLB 1974). After his call to the Bar in 1976, he practised law for five years in
London, Ontario. During that time he also served as Chair of the London
Committee of Adjustments which decided cases under the Planning Act. In 1981,
he was appointed as a Commissioner of the Residential Tenancy Commission,
and later as Appeal Commissioner. Since 1986, Mr. Braund has been the Rent
Registrar for Ontario under the Rent Regulation and Rent Control Programs. He is
a member of the Executive of the Couchiching Institute of Public Affairs, and also
Co-Chair of the Rules of Practice Committee of the Society of Ontario Adjudicators
and Regulators.

GILLES GUÉNETTE
Gilles Guénette graduated from the University of Ottawa, Faculty of Law where he
later lectured in Civil Procedure. He worked as a general practitioner for more
than thirty years and also acted as ad hoc hearing counsel for the RCMP Public
Complaints Commission. Mr Guénette has recently practised as an arbitrator and
mediator, and lectured in Alternative Dispute Resolution at the Law Society of
Upper Canada Bar Admission Course. Mr. Guénette was, until his appointment to
the Tribunal, a member of the Advisory Committee of the Neighbourhood Coalition
for Conflict Resolution, and the Vice-Chair of Ottawa-Carleton Housing Authority.
He is a former president of L’Association des juristes d’expression française de
l’Ontario.

CONNIE HOLMES
Connie Holmes has a long history with the Ministry of the Attorney General. Her
prior experience includes: serving as Registrar of the Divisional Court, Southwest
Region, Hearings Officer for Small Claims Court pre-trials, Registrar for Landlord
and Tenant Hearings, and Counter Services Manager in London, Court Services
Manager in Stratford and Goderich, Assistant to the Regional Senior Judge for the
Southwest Region, and Special Advisor to the Assistant Deputy Attorney General.
Page 19

Ms. Holmes has been active in community service organizations such as Mission
Services (London), founding member of Teen Girls’ Home, Brain Tumour
Foundation of Canada (Gus Macher Tournament), and the Advisory Committee of
Collections, London Historical Museums.

MARY LEE
Mary Lee most recently served for 3 years as Registrar and Chief Administration
Officer of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board leading the Board through a
complete reorganization of its administrative processes. Prior to that, Ms. Lee was
extensively involved in training and staff development with the Ontario Provincial
Police for over 8 years. She also served in the Premier’s Office, Correspondence
Unit. Ms. Lee is an active member of the Society of Adjudicator’s and Regulators
Training and Education Committee.

BEVERLY MOORE
Beverly Moore graduated from Sir Wilfred Laurier University with a Bachelor of
Arts degree. She later graduated from the law clerk's program at Fanshawe
College. Ms. Moore spent 12 years working in community legal clinics. She most
recently served as a Vice Chair with the Social Assistance Review Board.

CHRIS BRANEY
Chris Braney has extensive experience in both the business community and in
public service. Over the years, he has served as the Vice President of the
Centennial Community and Recreation Association, a Director of the Variety Club
Telethon, and is currently the President of West Hill Community Services which is
a volunteer board that caters to the needs of under privileged members of the
community. In 1994, he was elected to the Scarborough Board of Education,
where he served as both a Trustee and the Vice-Chairman of the Board
overseeing an annual budget of $525 million. As Vice-Chairman Chris chaired
Page 20

many hearings dealing with students who had broken the rules associated with the
Scarborough Board of Educations zero tolerance to weapons and violence policy.
Chris has also been the owner and operator of a successful health and safety
products company, where he specialized in marketing and communications.
Before joining the Tribunal, Chris was the Director of Marketing for a Toronto
based aerospace company.

STANLEY CHAPMAN
Stanley Chapman was educated in Scotland and has experience with municipal
and provincial governments in a number of capacities. Prior to joining the Ontario
Rental Housing Tribunal, Mr. Chapman served as an Adjudicator with the Worker’s
Compensation Appeals Tribunal for 7 years.

ANDREAS VON CRAMON
Andreas von Cramon is a graduate of Osgoode Hall Law School. He practiced law
in Brockville after his call to the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1991 until his
appointment to the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal. He has been a Member of
the Ontario Consent and Capacity Board since 1996.

JANET DAVIES
Janet Davies has been working in the field of rent regulation since 1976 and has
held a number of challenging positions, including that of a decision maker under
both the Residential Rent Regulation Act and the Rent Control Act. Ms. Davies
received the Commemorative Medal for the 125th Anniversary of the
Confederation of Canada given for outstanding and significant contributions to her
community. In addition, she has completed several courses relating to the
residential rental environment, some of which include Real Estate, Property
Management and Alternative Dispute Resolution.

Page 21

NANCY FAHLGREN
Nancy Fahlgren comes to the Tribunal with over 10 years experience in
administering rental housing legislation. Professional highlights include: serving as
acting Chief Rent Officer under Rent Control Programs, adjudicating issues
governed by the predecessor housing legislations, and mediating Landlord and
Tenant rental matters. Ms. Fahlgren’s academic concentrations consisted of
science and languages obtained through Nipissing University and the University of
Toronto.

LOLA FABOWALÉ
Ms. Lola Fabowalé graduated from Trent University in 1988 with a bachelor’s
degree in Administrative and Policy Studies. She also completed a Master’s
degree in Management Studies from Carleton University in 1991. Until her
appointment to the Tribunal, Ms. Fabowalé coordinated the development of the
policy and advocacy function at Oxfam Canada. She joined Oxfam Canada as
Programme Development Officer in 1995 and gradually accepted wider
organizational responsibilities. Other organizations she has worked for include:
the Public Interest Advocacy Centre (Research Director), Ekos Research
Consulting Associates (Research Analyst) and the International Development
Research Centre (Professional Research Assistant). Her Master’s thesis, An
Empirical Analysis of Credit Terms to Female Entrepreneurs was a research
project which the Canadian Federation of Independent Business commissioned in
1989. Her involvement in community development work, featured a two-year term
as Treasurer on the Volunteer Board of Immigrant and Visible Minority Women
Against Abuse (IVMWAA).

STEVEN J. FAUGHNAN
Steven Faughnan received a Bachelor of Commerce degree from Concordia
University and degrees in Civil (BCL) and Common Law (LLB) from McGill
University. After his call to the Bar of Ontario, Mr. Faughnan practised civil
litigation and represented both landlords and tenants in proceedings under the
Landlord and Tenant Act. Since then, he has represented clients on mediation
Page 22

and before administrative tribunals and has appeared on civil and commercial
cases at Ontario Courts of all levels, including the Ontario Court of Appeal.

RICHARD A. FELDMAN
Richard Feldman holds Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Laws and Bachelor of
Education degrees. He is the recipient of many academic honours, including the
Arnold Balins Award (University of Toronto) which was conferred upon Mr.
Feldman based on his academic standing, his demonstrated concern for others,
his perseverance, and his qualities of leadership. As a lawyer, he has acted on
behalf of landlords and tenants in residential and commercial tenancy disputes and
rent review applications. He has relevant experience in administrative law, civil
litigation and residential real estate transactions. In addition, Mr. Feldman is an
experienced educator.

JOHN GOODCHILD
Graduated from Queen's University in 1977 with LLB.; called to the Ontario Bar in
1979. Engaged in private practice in both Ottawa and Kingston until 1993.
Employed by the Information and Privacy Commissioner/Ontario from 1993 to
1996, then engaged in private practice in the United States for two years.
Employed by the Information Commissioner of Canada prior to being appointed to
the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal.

CHARLES GASCOYNE
(Part-Time Member)
Mr. Gascoyne graduated from the University of Windsor (BA, 1983 and LLB,
1986). Mr. Gascoyne is a Member of the Board of Directors of the Essex Law
Association and a number of other local community groups. Mr. Gascoyne is a
part-time Member of the Tribunal and carries on practice in Kingsville, Ontario.
Page 23

MURRAY WM. GRAHAM
Murray Wm. Graham is a graduate of York University (B.A. 1970) and Osgoode
Hall Law School (LL.B. 1973). After his call to the Bar in 1975, he practiced law in
the City of Toronto until 1989. From 1990 to 1998, Mr. Graham was a legal and
administrative consultant to corporations in the transportation, waste management,
and environmental research and development industries.

DAVID J. GREGORY
David Gregory is a graduate of the University of Toronto (B.A.Sc. 1969, LL.B.
1972). Mr. Gregory carried on a general law practice in Brantford from 1974 until
his appointment to the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal. Mr. Gregory has served
as a Deputy Judge of the Small Claims Court, and was a member for 13 years and
Past Chairman of the City of Brantford Committee of Adjustment. Mr. Gregory is a
Past President of the Brant Law Association and the Brant Curling Club, a former
director of the Brantford Regional Chamber of Commerce, and a past member of
the Brantford Economic Development Board.

SHAWN HAYMAN
Shawn Hayman attended Fanshawe College, specializing in Accounting Principles
and other business disciplines. She worked for 10 years in the financial sector
before joining the Ministry of Housing in 1987. Ms. Hayman has spent the last 11
years involved in all aspects of the delivery of Rent Review Programs as an
Appeal Analyst, Financial Consultant and Board Member with the Rent Review
Board, and most recently as a Rent Officer with Rent Control Programs. She
continues to be a member of the Rent Review Hearings Board.

Page 24

DAVID HORROX
David Horrox served as an administrator in several departments in the federal
government over many years, including the Unemployment Insurance
Commission, Canada Employment & Immigration Commission, Labour Canada,
and Human Resources Development Canada. He was also a Professor in the
School of Business at Centennial College, and a four term Trustee and Chairman
of the Scarborough Board of Education. Mr. Horrox is a graduate of York
University (BA. Honours) and the University of Toronto (MA., Public
Administration).

RICHARD ITTLEMAN
Richard Ittleman attended York University in Toronto, obtaining a Bachelor of Arts
(B.A. Hons.) in History in 1975, and he received a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) from
the University of Windsor in 1978. Mr. Ittleman practiced law until 1987 in the
Greater Toronto Area, with a focus on civil litigation. Mr. Ittleman has been
involved for a number of years in community volunteer work where he has
undertaken a number of fundraising and other projects.

LINDA JOSS
Linda Joss commenced her career in the pioneer days of child care work. After 10
years in that field, she joined Metro Toronto’s Community Services Department as
a manager of hostels. During her years with Community Services, Ms. Joss
managed and developed programmes in Metro’s 4 major emergency shelters and
consequently became very involved in the impact of evictions.

Page 25

LAURIE KOCH
Laurie Koch received her BA. From the University of Massachusetts at Amherst
(History/Literature) and has completed numerous paralegal courses in both the
United States and Ontario. Ms. Koch achieved a Certificate in Alternative Dispute
Resolution in 1996 from Seneca College. Her professional experience includes
paralegal work in both the public and private sectors. Ms. Koch was most recently
a Rent Officer and Mediator with the Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing
where she adjudicated rent control applications and provided dispute resolution
services to the landlord and tenant community as a member of the ministry’s pilot
project mediation team.

ROMUALD KWOLEK
Romuald Kwolek is a graduate of the University of Western Ontario (LLB, 1981).
He has practiced law in the city of Sault Ste. Marie since 1983 and has carried on
a general practice with Orazietti & Kwolek since 1989, specializing in criminal and
family law. Romuald Kwolek is currently a deputy judge of the Small Claims Court,
and continues to be actively involved in community volunteer work.

EDWARD LEE
Edward Lee is a graduate of McGill University (B.Sc., B.C.L., LL.B.), and has
practised law in both Quebec and Ontario. He has also previously adjudicated
with the Adjudication Directorate of Canada Immigration.

IAN MACINNIS
Ian MacInnis graduated from the University of Waterloo. He has served with the
Manitoba Police Commission, the Alberta Correctional Service, the Ontario Board

Page 26

of Parole, and as a Councillor and Deputy Mayor of the City of Kingston. Mr.
MacInnis has also been in private practice as a Court Agent representing clients in
Small Claims Court and out-of-court settlements.

DONALD MACVICAR
Don MacVicar is a transplanted Nova Scotian who graduated from Acadia
University in Wolfville, Nova Scotia with a Bachelor of Business Administration,
and from Dalhousie University in Halifax with his LLB and Master of Business
Administration degrees. He was called to the Nova Scotia Bar, and to the Ontario
Bar. For the past decade, Mr. Mac Vicar has been in private practice in the
Toronto area working primarily as a criminal defence counsel.

J. STEVEN MCCUTCHEON
Steve McCutcheon is a graduate of Queen's University (B.A. 1979) and the
University of Windsor (LL.B. 1985) and was called to the Bar of Ontario in 1987.
He has practiced law with Gardiner, Roberts in Toronto and later with smaller firms
in Milton, Ontario. In between, he operated his own business importing parts for
British sports cars and also found time to serve with the Peel Regional Police for a
short period of time.

TOM MCDERMOTT
Tom McDermott has been adjudicating and resolving landlord and tenant disputes
for over 10 years. He is a member of the Society of Ontario Adjudicators and
Regulators. Mr. McDermott participated in a pilot project to mediate disputes at
Landlord and Tenant Court, after completing training in alternative dispute
resolution. Mr. McDermott received his Honours BA. (Economics) from York
University.

Page 27

SCOTT N.F. MCNEIL
Scott N. F. McNeil is a graduate of Lakehead University (B.A. 1972) and the
University of Manitoba (L.L.B., 1978). He was called to the bar in Manitoba in
1979 and Ontario in 1981. He has practiced criminal and civil litigation in Thunder
Bay from 1981. He is a part time Assistant Crown Attorney and a former standing
agent for the Department of Justice. He is a member of the Law Society of
Manitoba, the Law Society of Upper Canada, the Thunder Bay Law Association,
and the Criminal Lawyers Association. He is a member of Norwest Gyro (and a
past president), a former director of the Thunder Bay Children’s Aid Society and
Children’s Services Foundation and former director and a past president of the
Thunder Bay Thunderbolts Swim Club. He was appointed as a part time member
of the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal on August 24, 1998.

DONNA MCGAVIN
Member - Rent Review Hearings Board 1987 - 1994.
Vice-Chair - Social Assistance Review Board 1995 - 1998
Member - Appointed June 1999 Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal.

BRIAN L. RODENHURST
Brian Rodenhurst graduated from the University of Guelph with a Bachelor of Arts
(Honours) and the University of Windsor with a Bachelor of Law. For 20 years he
was in private law practice. Mr. Rodenhurst is the former mayor of the Town of
Ingersoll, and Chair of Ingersoll Police Services. He is a former member of the
County Council, County of Oxford, Vice-Chair of Administration and Finance.

Page 28

JEFFREY ROGERS
Jeffrey Rogers graduated with a B.A. in English from the University of Toronto and
an LL.B from the University of Windsor. After his call to the Bar he entered
practice as a sole practitioner and practised extensively in the areas of civil
litigation and Real Estate. In 1992 Mr. Rogers was appointed a Deputy Judge of
the Toronto Small Claims Court and continued to adjudicate on all matters within
the jurisdiction of that court until his appointment to the Tribunal.

NANCY SAVAGE
Nancy Savage attended the University of Western Ontario Law School obtaining
an LLB degree in 1975. She has experience in private practice and in the
representation of a child protection agency as in-house counsel.

SHERYL RUTH SENIS
Sheryl Senis has twelve years experience managing all aspects of a diversified
business portfolio. As a former owner/broker of a real estate firm, she managed
human resources, liability management, company structuring and business
planning. As well as receiving her certificates in Business Administration,
mortgage financing, property law and appraisal, she obtained her designation as a
market value appraiser (MVA) in 1995. Recently, as a municipal Councillor, Ms.
Senis was Chair and/or Member of several committees, Social Development
Council, Director; Pickering Hydro Liaison Committee, Vice-Chair; Personnel and
Performance Appraisal Committee, to name a few.

CYNTHIA LYNN SUMMERS
Cynthia Summers is a graduate of McMaster University (BA, Political Science
1988, MSW, Social Welfare Policy, 1995). Cynthia has extensive experience in
Page 29

the social service field working with a diverse clientele, She has worked with the
mentally ill, social assistance recipients and mentally and physically challenged
children and adults. Her experience includes having represented the Ministry of
Community and Social Services as a Case Presenting Officer before the Social
Assistance Review Board. Most recently, she was a Professor in the School of
Community Services at Sheridan College.

CATHERINE SKINNER
Catherine Skinner is a graduate of the University of Toronto, Faculty of Law
and the University of Winnipeg, where she received a BA (Honours) in
French and Classics. She is a member of the Law Society of British
Columbia and the Law Society of Upper Canada. Prior to joining the Ontario
Rental Housing Tribunal, she was legal counsel to the Ontario Assessment
Review Board.
DAVID G. TIMMS
David Timms is a graduate of the University of Western Ontario (B.A. 1980) and
the University of Windsor (LL.B. 1983). He is a candidate for an LL.M. in Civil
Litigation and Dispute Resolution with Osgoode Hall Law School. Mr. Timms has
been practicing in the area of civil litigation and dispute resolution exclusively
since his call to the Bar in 1985. He is a member of the Canadian Bar Association,
the Arbitration and Mediation Institute of Ontario, The Advocates’ Society and the
Association of Trial Lawyers of America.

DIANE L. TINKER
Diane L. Tinker is graduate of McMaster University (BA.) and Queen’s University
at Kingston (LL.B). After her call to the Bar in 1981, she was in private practice for
two years and then became in-house counsel for 14 years. Ms. Tinker has been a
Deputy Judge in Small Claims Court in both Kitchener and Cambridge for the past
6 years.
Page 30

DAVID R. WRIGHT
David Wright is a graduate of Carleton University in Ottawa (BA. Honours in Public
Administration). For the first 10 years of his career, Mr. Wright was a public
housing property manager in Ottawa. He has spent the last eleven years in rent
regulation, also in Ottawa. Mr. Wright has volunteered in various activities such as
the Gloucester Public Library Board (Chair), various school advisory councils and
the Kiwanis Club of Rideau.

Page 31

